okay welcome back to the course or not
processing today we're going to start
the section on syntax I'm going to
introduce grammars and syntax in the
next few segments so what are the
fundamental questions in linguistics is
where the language is just the bag of
words we know that it is not because if
we rearrange the words in a sentence
we're going to get most of the time
nonsense syntax turns out to mean that
grammatical rules exist and then they
apply to categories and groups of words
not individual words so for example a
sentence can include a subject and a
predicate the subject can be typically a
noun phrase and the predicate is a verb
phrase so here's some examples of noun
phrases the cat Samantha or she
some examples of verb phrases for
example arrived went away and had dinner
we can combine any of those noun phrases
with any of the verb phrases and former
syntactically correct sentence for
example we can say the cat went away or
Samantha had dinner so when people learn
a new word before they can use it in a
sentence they have to learn its
syntactic role for example if I tell you
that work is a noun you can immediately
create sentences such as I can see two
works here or I don't like works if I
tell that Clovis is an adjective you can
immediately create a sentence that says
something like this I don't like Clovis
people I'm not saying that those
sentences make sense but they're at
least syntactically correct I actually
wanted to come up with more examples of
artificial words for this slide work was
actually created by listen many years
ago as an example and clue vyas comes
from a polo that I designed for knock
law a few years ago I tried quite a few
other words however it turns out that
most of the things that I came up with
even though they didn't sound like words
in English turned out to exist in some
dictionaries of slang and in many cases
they meant very bad things I don't want
to repeat them here in front of you so
let's see now how we can define parts of
speech from a syntactic point of view
the first thing is now those are the
most common type of words we
do they all have in common one of the
properties that most nouns typically
have is that they can be preceded by the
word da so I can say the cat or their
house what about verbs
well vers have also different properties
one is that they cannot be preceded by
the word they're like nouns but they can
be preceded by can't so for example
sleep is a verb and it can be preceded
by the word can't I can say can't sleep
well the adjectives well adjectives are
their words that come between the and
the noun
I mean this is not the only property of
adjectives but this is one that holds
for them so I can say the clue vyas work
well this is slightly different from the
high school definitions or the great
school definitions that you're familiar
with in that case now what they find to
be things and concepts and ideas and
words were actions so from a syntactic
point of view we are more interested in
the way that the words can form
sentences rather than the meaning of the
individual words we can similarly define
other categories of parts of speech for
example determiners and prepositions
which we have seen before so one of the
fundamental concepts in syntax is called
a constituent constituents are
continuous pieces of text there
non-crossing so if two constituents
share any word at all then one of the
two constituents must completely contain
the other one and then each word is a
constituent in itself and the row of
constituents is that any set of any
sequence of words that is part of the
same constituent can be replaced with
any other member of that constituent and
still form a grammatically correct
sentence so for example she Samantha and
the cat can all be considered noun
phrases and that is one of the simplest
types of constituents so there are many
types of constituent tests that you can
find it in a linguistics literature I'm
going to run through some of them here
and give you examples of them so the
first one is the coordination test I
need to worry that all those tests are
just used as examples and they can be
overlaid that in principle if towards
pass multiple tests
chances are very high that the two words
or phrases I guess belong to the same
constituent type so the coordination
test tells us that if we combine two
constituents with a conjunction that
means therefore they have the same type
we can also have the pronoun test if I
can replace a small dog a whole unit in
this sentence with the word it that
means that the unit is a constituent
there's also this very interesting
constituent test called question by
repetition suppose that we have the
sentence I have seen blue elephants and
we want to find out what are the
constituents of the sentence for example
is the sequence of word seen blue a
constituent or is the sequence of words
blue elephants a constituent
well the constituent test here is going
to tell us the answer so let's try this
little dialogue I have seen blue
elephants blue elephants oh this sounds
like a meaningful dialogue
therefore blue elephants is a
constituent but now I imagine the second
dialogue I have seen blue elephants seen
blue well this doesn't look like a
plausible dialogue seen blue therefore
is not a constituent and finally a third
dialogue would be I have seen blue
elephants seen blue elephants this
sounds actually fairly grammatical and
therefore seen blue elephants is also a
valid constituent there is also the
topical ization test which allows you to
check if something is a constituent by
fronting it at the beginning of the
sentence so instead of saying I have
seen blue elephants you can say blue
elephants I have seen therefore blue
elephants is also a constituent there's
also the question test if you can
replace a phrase with some question word
like what that also is an indication
that the phrase is a constituent I have
seen blue elephants what have I seen
what meaning blue elephants there are
many other constituent tests I'm not
going to go through them in a lot of
detail for example the deletion test the
semantic test and finally the simple
intuition test if something looks
intuitively like a constituent it
probably is one
so now let's see how we can use tree
structures to generate sentences the
simplest algorithm is the following you
have a context-free grammar which I'm
going to explain in a few slides and
then you start from the so-called start
symbol of the grammar you generate a
tree structure that matches the grammar
and then you feel the leaf nodes of the
tree with terminal symbols such as
individual words so let's see how we can
build a sentence like this so the
simplest possible sentence in English is
perhaps one it consists of a noun and a
verb
something like birds fly so the notation
on the screen tells you that we try to
generate a sentence and then the arrow
indicates that in order to generate the
sentence we first have to produce a noun
and then a verb
so if birds is a noun and fly is a verb
that means that birds fly is a correct
grammatical sentence according to this
grammar so this is our simple grammar s
transforms into env and it's either
Samantha or main or Jorge V is either
left or sang or walked and we can
produce the following sentences Samantha
sang for he left or Jorge sang and so on
now obviously this grammar is very
simple it's only going to generate
two-word sentences we need to expand it
so so far we only had intransitive verbs
first that don't have any direct object
so one possible rule that we want to add
to the grammar next is to allow
transitive verbs remember those are the
ones that can take direct objects for
example we can say something like Jorge
so Samantha where Samantha is the direct
object of the verb soft we also want to
be able to include determiners for
example say something like the cats
where d is a determiner it turns out
that if you want to add all the possible
combinations of constituents that you
can have in a sentence you're going to
end up with a very severe case of a
combinatorial explosion so there will be
just too many rules and when you combine
them together they will produce way too
many sentences many of which are not
even correct in English even though they
are grammatical according to your
grammar so we need to come up with some
ways to combine
words into constituents and then define
our syntactic rules in terms of the
constituents rather than the words
themselves so for example we can expand
the idea of a noun to be that of a noun
phrase and we can do the same thing for
verbs and expand them into verb phrases
so verb phrases would include for
example the case of individual
intransitive verbs such as walked or
transitive verbs or died transitive
verbs verbs with prepositional phrases
words with multiple prepositional
phrases and so on
so let's now expand our grammar a little
bit instead of a noun and a verb we have
a noun phrase and a verb phrase so s
goes to NP followed by VP and PS is the
sequence determiner noun and VP is the
sequence verb non-face the determiners
here does a mark with DTR either the
word the or the word are the nouns are
child cat and dog and the verbs are took
so likes scared and chased so now this
grammar is going to put use only noun
phrases that start with a determiner for
example it won't allow us to produce the
word Samantha as either the subject or
the object here two sample sentences
that this grammar generates one is a dog
chased a cat and one is the child so a
dog so there's a way if the same
left-hand side of our transformation who
can generate multiple right-hand sides
instead of writing there were multiple
times we could just write one ho which
has the left-hand side constituent an
arrow and then all the possible
expansions on the right-hand side
separated by a vertical bar the vertical
bar indicates a choice or an alternative
so for example we can have one whole for
proper nouns and one for common now so
this way we can handle both Samantha as
a proper noun or PN in this case or we
can have the cats which is d T followed
by CN where CN stands for common noun so
the grammar that we have so far has
grown a little bit S can now produce
again NP and VP however we have
two rules for noun phrases determiner
common noun or a proper noun the verb
phrase includes a verb and a noun phrase
and now we can have determiners and
common nouns and proper nouns as well as
the verbs from the previous example so
now this grammar allows us to put your
sentences such as a child scared Jorge
or min took the child
there are many optional categories in
grammatical rules that means that for
example we can have noun phrases with
adjectives and nouns faces without
adjectives in order to take into account
all the possible optional categories we
have to introduce another type of
notation which is parenthesis if we put
something in parentheses that means that
it is optional so let's look at the
examples for nouns one observation that
we can make is that whenever n is
allowed in a sentence we can replace its
in tactically with the following
sequences any one of them determiner
noun adjective noun or determiner
adjective noun for example if we allow
cats then we allow the cats we allow
small cats and we allow these small cats
so now we can use the notation for
alternatives noun phrase produces either
N or determiner n or adjective N or
determiner adjective N or we can just
use parentheses we can say a noun phrase
is a sequence that consists of an
optional determiner followed by one
optional adjective followed by a noun so
this rule here can be equivalent to four
different rules the goal n the role DTN
the road JJM and the role dt j JM now
let's see what we can do with verb
phrases there are many types of verb
phrases we saw some of those in an
earlier lecture
those can contain intransitive verbs
such as ran as in samantha ran we can
have sentence where we have an
intransitive verb and then a
prepositional phrase for example
samantha ran to the park we can also
have a sentence which only has a
article Samantha ran away in this case
away is just a single proposition we can
also have transitive verbs samantha
bought a cookie and we can have a
transitive verb with a direct object and
a prepositional phrase samantha bought a
cookie for john so the overall structure
of the verb phrase is going to be
something like this it will always start
with the verb but then it will have an
optional noun phrase for the direct
object and then it will also have an
optional preposition for things like a
way and an optional noun phrase that
follows the preposition so if we have
both the P and the NP that follows it
that means that we would have an entire
prepositional phrase as part of the verb
phrase so this grammar can now generate
the following sentence Samantha so the
cat but it can also generate the Jorge
gave the cat 2 min which has a
prepositional phrase in it so what our
prepositional phrase is now let's look
at some examples Maggie bought the book
for John in a bookstore the bookstore
sells magazine the bookstore on Main
Street sells magazines Mary ran away
Mary ran down the hill so in all those
sentences you can see that every time we
have a noun we can have a prepositional
phrase that follows it so John can be
followed by in a bookstore
bookstore can be followed by on Main
Street the setting applies to verbs
every time a verb can be followed by a
preposition like a ran away
it can also be followed by a
prepositional phrase ran down the hill
so in order to accommodate prepositional
phrases we have to allow a new
constituent called PP which can be
embedded in either the NP or the VP part
of the sentence and the rule is very
simple wherever a preposition is allowed
it can be followed by a noun phrase so
for example run up versus run up the
street a noun phrase can contain any
number of prepositional phrases but only
up to two noun phrases so this is only
in the case of Dai transitive verbs such
as
Maggie gave John a book so how do we
revise now our grammar to take into
account of prepositional phrases well so
far the rules that we have our s goes to
n P V P followed by a row for noun
phrase and I go for verb phrases and now
we have a row for prepositional phrases
or prepositional phrases a preposition
followed by an optional noun phrase and
now for the very first time we see
something that is really important in
language if you look at rule number two
here we can see that a noun phrase can
generate a prepositional phrase and then
if you look down at rule number four you
will see that the prepositional phrase
can generate a noun phrase therefore we
have our first instance of recursion in
the grammar what that means is that we
can apply rules two and four in an
arbitrarily long sequence and produce
extremely long sentences here is a good
moment to stop for a second and explain
the difference that is made by linguists
between something called performance and
competence I'm not going to go into too
much detail about this principle but the
basic idea is the following even though
a context-free grammar can produce
arbitrarily long sentences that have
let's say thousands of prepositional
phrases embedded in noun phrases
embedded in other prepositional phrases
that doesn't mean that human sentences
are that long people can understand long
sentences if they spend a lot of time on
them but they were never going to
actually put use them or expect other
people to produce them there's usually a
limit of no more than four or five
prepositional phrases in a noun phrase a
lot anything more than that would make
the sentence completely incomprehensible
but we can certainly say something like
this I saw John yesterday in the park
and perhaps add a few more prepositional
phrases at the end but we're never going
to see more than four or five so now
let's see how the problem of
prepositional phrase ambiguity which we
have alluded to earlier can actually be
described in a context-free grammar
let's look at the sentence the boy saw
the woman with the telescope
the sentence is ambiguous because it has
two interpretations the first one is
that the boy used the telescope to see
the woman and the second interpretation
is that the woman who was carrying a
telescope was seen by the boy now in
this case we have a real ambiguity
because both of those interpretations
make sense in different contexts let's
look at the grammar that is used to
generate the sentence a prepositional
phrase can produce a preposition
followed by a noun phrase and then a
verb phrase can also include a
prepositional phrase and a noun phrase
can include a prepositional phrase so
they can actually be two different parse
trees that correspond to this sentence
that will use the PP either as part of
the noun phrase or as part of the verb
phrase so we'll look at this problem
later on this semester and understand
how to deal with it
one additional symbol that can be used
in context-free grammars is the cleanest
are which is denoted in parenthesis in
the header of this slide it is used to
denote the sequence of constituents so
for example JJ star means the sequence
of zero or more adjectives it can be any
number of that it can be seven or ten it
turns out that in English noun phrases
can have multiple adjectives or other
so-called plea modifiers that precede
the noun inside a noun phrase for
example we can say the thin blue line in
this case thin precedes blue and it blue
precedes line the general structure of a
noun phrase can be some like this a
determiner like the followed by some
number of adjectives followed by the
noun itself let's look at a few more
examples we can say a big red house but
we really cannot say a red big house
this sounds really awkward and that's
why we've marked it with a star it's
very interesting to think about the
order in which adjectives can be put in
in the pre modifier section of a noun
phrase what allows certain sequences and
not
it turns out that in English adjectives
ordering in the noun phrase depends on
semantics on the meanings of the
individual words there has been a lot of
work on this subject and I want to run
you through an exercise that will help
you understand how this process works so
this exercise we're going to look at a
few titles of famous songs and books and
we'll try to see if we can find the
pattern so the little red riding-hood
three little pigs that three musketeers
the steadfast tin soldier the French
Connection
Old MacDonald five golden rings and the
Ancient Mariner if you think about the
meaning of each of the individual words
you can figure out that there are
certain combinations of meanings that
can only appear in a certain order so we
saw in the previous slide that we can
use size before color but we cannot use
color before size so what kind of
semantic categories of adjectives do we
have in those examples here so little is
a size red is a color riding is
something like a purpose or designation
there is a determinant that's not an
adjective and the determinant will
always come before the adjectives all
this about age golden is material
franchise nationality steadfast is
quality and finally Tina's material so
if you try to come up with all the
possible combinations of those
categories you will realize that in most
cases you have a very specific ordering
of the semantic categories of the
adjectives so here's an example there
may be some exceptional exceptions to it
but this is as close as possible to what
happens in most sentences so if you have
a determiner adjectives and a noun
they're most likely to appear in this
order determiner first noun last and
then the adjectives in the middle in the
following order number strength size age
shape color origin material and purpose
and you can actually infer this order by
looking at the example
on the previous slide and by looking at
the partial order that they created so
now let's look at the problem of nested
sentences so unless that sentence is
something like this birds fly versus I
believe that birds fly so in the second
example birds fly is nested inside the
larger sentence so here are some more
examples
I don't recall whether I took the dog
out or do you know if the mall is still
open so for example in the first
sentence here the embedded sentence or
the nested sentences I took the dog out
so in order to accommodate nested
sentences we need to revise our grammar
a little bit the new oh is this one here
a verb phrase produces a verb followed
by zero one or two noun phrases and then
we have an optional sequence of C which
is a conjunction followed by an S an
entire new sentence so we have again an
instance of recursion because the
general rule was that s goes to a and P
VP and I have a row that VP can produce
an S so we can now again recursively
alternate between s and VP and produce
arbitrary sentences so what are the kind
of conjunctions that can go into the
position of the C well those are the
so-called subordinating conjunctions
things like that and whether okay so can
the sequence of a subordinating
conjunctions sentence appear inside a
noun phrase well it turns out that it
can and in that case that also means
that we can have C s sequence as part of
the subject of the sentence let's look
at an example whether he will win the
elections remains to be seen the
predicate of the sentence is remains to
be seen and the subject is the phrase
whether he will win the elections and we
can even verify this syntactically what
remains to be seen whether he will win
the elections or whether he will win the
elections remains to be seen which
confirms that whether he will win the
elections is the subject of the sentence
so let's go back now to the topic of
recursion s can generate verb phrases
and verb phrases can generate s noun
phrases can generate prepositional
phrases and prepositional phrases can
generate noun phrases so essentially a
recursion allows us to produce really
long sentences but as I mentioned
earlier we really cannot designate based
on the grammar what is the longest
sentence in English in fact the grammar
will allow us to produce infinitely long
sentences there are other cases of
recursion at the puing grammars for
example we can have conjunctions of noun
phrases so a noun phrase can be replaced
by the sequence noun phrase and noun
phrase for example I like apples and
oranges where apples and oranges
combined is a noun phrase and also
apples by itself is a noun phrase and
oranges by itself is a noun phrase we
can also have conjunctions of
prepositional phrases so PP can be
transformed into the sequence PP + PP
and we can do the same thing exactly
with verb phrases for example I like
walking and running so as you can see
there are some meta patterns that emerge
I'm only going to mention this topic
very briefly because it's not really
germane to this course however I think
it's important to understand what the
term x-bar theory means I'm going to
introduce it in a second let's look at
this example here the sentence can be
transformed into a noun phrase verb
phrase sequence the noun phrase and verb
phrase and prepositional phrase have
their own rules so what is the meta
pattern well the meta pattern in all
those cases is that we have some sort of
a phrase whether it's a noun phrase a
verb phrase or a prepositional phrase XP
is the collective name for all of those
phrases and then those phrases can be
replaced by something called a specifier
this is what comes before the main part
of the phrase followed by X bar or which
is sometimes denoted as X ' like it
example here and then another portion of
this rule tells us that X bar produces X
followed by a compliment so everything
before the X bar part is a specifier
everything after it is a compliment so
for example in the noun phrase case we
can have noun phrase produces a
determiner followed by M bar if we
interested in X bars here in more detail
there are websites devoted to it as well
as a lot of literature in the
linguistics community so now let's look
at some meta rules for conjunctions we
looked earlier at examples of noun
phrase and noun phrase and verb phrase
and verb phrase and so on so in the most
general case we have a category X that
generates X and X this kind of rule can
be expanded to cover even entire
sentences s produces s and s for example
it is sunny today and I will go to the
park what other things can we add to the
grammar
well one category of particular
importance is that of auxiliaries and we
want to see now if auxiliaries pass any
of the constituent tests that we looked
at earlier so one thing that we are
interested in is is the sequence
auxiliary verb a constituent for example
in the sentence I have seen blue
elephants and will remember them forever
we have two sequences of auxiliary verb
and as you can see from the structure of
the sentence it passes the conjunction
test I can say I have seen blue
elephants periods
I will remember them forever but I can
also say I have seen blue elephants and
we will remember them forever so because
have seen blue elephants it's parallel
to will remember them forever that gives
us an indication that those form
constituents so the recursive rule here
is going to be some like this verb
phrase produces auxiliary followed by
verb phrase so we can have a sequence of
as many auxiliaries as we want on the
left hand side
out of the verb so we can say Raj may
have been sleeping in which case we have
three applications of this for each time
generating an additional auxiliary well
is this in such recursion unlimited
where it turns out that it is not it is
limited to a few auxiliaries in the verb
face let's look now at an exercise we
have a grammar that is slightly
different from the one that we had most
recently it has rules for s and P V P P
P as well as an embedded phase so now I
want you to do this yourselves
look at those three sentences and try to
generate descriptions of those sentences
using the rules in the grammar the small
dog of the neighbors brought me an old
tennis ball is the first sentence so
obviously this is a sentence therefore
we need to start with the row for s so
which right hand side are we going to
use n P VP or CP VP well why don't you
think about it and also do the same
thing for the other two sentences and
try to come up with the exact set of
rules that I used to generate those
three sentences when you're done you
will have understood the whole idea of
parsing so parsing which we're going to
talk about in the next section in more
detail is the process of taking a
sentence and a grammar and coming up
with what is known as a parse tree or
which is more or less the set of rules
that were used from the grammar to
produce the sentence so this concludes
the introduction to syntax in the next
segment we are going to look at parsing
in more detail